You tell me, you guide me, what you need me to say.
One of the things I was interested in was
using electrophoretic techniques for purifying
proteans.
Fortunately, he was the person to talk to, and I
didn't know that at the time. I just, you know, I
would be in the hall or see him in the hall, and he'd
be, he quite often visited with his students, his
own students, as well as other faculty. And I don't
know, maybe he spent more time for his students
than other people, because he was, I believe he was
department head at the time. I think so. But he was
very frequently in the hall, and so I had the
occasion to visit with him on several occasions
on, you know, using, applying electrophoretic
techniques. Now you had, so you're taking a full
load. Yes. But you're also teaching, working full
time. Well, that's part of the responsibility.
But yeah, yeah, oh yeah. And when would those
instructional duties begin for you? Those would
be at least two times a week, two full afternoons a
week. You're saying four hours? Mm-hmm. And how
much preparation time did each lab session
require for you all? Well, quite often we'd
prepare about an hour or so before the exam. I mean,
not before the exam, before the exam. and
fortunately you see if we had not known pretty well
if we hadn't had the laboratory experience that we
had had that would have been chaos that would have
been but we knew pretty well I mean we need this we
need this blood auger we need this kind of media we
need this kind of media and we're going to be
talking about E. coli today so we don't need the
blood auger but we need some EMB and we need the
nutrient auger and we're going to need these
various biochemicals and we had even at that time
we had a pretty good support staff so we could say
look we're going to need before this afternoon or
before before next Thursday afternoon we're
going to need this for this many students and
that's about you know and how would you describe
the facilities in veterinary medicine at that
time in comparison now uh See, I had been
accustomed to state of the art, I mean, with the
Army, state of the art laboratory facilities. And
they were very good facilities. They stacked up
very well with that. They stacked up much better
than, for example, the facilities at the
University of Texas, the microbiology
facilities at the University of Texas, and
certainly better than the facilities that they
had at Southwest Texas. They were not comparable
to what the Army had because, you know, they had an
unlimited budget. But they,
somebody, and I guess it was Leland, had the
foresight to hire these ladies from Caldwell and
the surrounding community who were committed to
wanting to do a good job And they generally did
exactly as they were told. And I mean, you know,
they followed instructions very well. And what
was their task? Making media and helping in the
preparation, you know, setting up things for the
labs and so forth. Now during your first
semesters, first year or so, do you remember any
unusual goof ups for you or anybody else where you
all learned by experience or something went
wrong? Something didn't work? Oh, I'm trying to
think of some. Yeah, there were several.
Well,
misidentifying, I mean, using some things for the
wrong thing.
Yeah, there's a group of organisms called
Clostridia. that produce a lot of gas and if you if
you put in a lot of sugar in the media and
you try to stopper the media those you inoculate
the media and at various times during the day those
you shouldn't be using stoppered media to begin
with with Clostridia and that sort of thing But we
got the media mixed up, and during the class you'd
see these stoppers popping off because of the
amount of gas that was being produced by those
things. Oh, I'm hard-pressed to think of any...
Nothing exploded, nothing caught fire? Well,
yes, as a matter of fact, we almost had a disaster at
one time. now you can't use things like ether you
know very readily but another individual I don't
know that I should mention his name because he
later became a department head in another
department but he was a graduate student at that
time too and he was working he was in another
department but he was working in our area and he's
working with ether And ether has a tendency, you
know, it's heavier than air so it tends to go along
the floor and the vapors go along the floor. And one
of these individuals, Paul Youngerman, was a
heavy smoker and of course at that time you could
smoke anywhere. And he was smoking one time and
this
individual who who was working with the ether, he
was trying to do some lipid extraction. At that
time you used ether to extract lipids. And so he was
trying to extract some things and he wasn't using a
fume hood. Fume hoods were rarely used at that time
too. So the ether vapors went along and here was
Paul Youngerman and he flipped off some ashes on
the floor. Fortunately, that's all it did, but it
could have caused a very serious problem.
How much did you see in your first semesters of the
Dean of Veterinary Medicine? Didn't see him at
all. He didn't come around to instruct you? No,
I'll tell you, no, he didn't. When did you first
meet him? Actually,
Al Price was the dean that was there when I was there
as a graduate student. I used to, I was kind of a
glutton for punishment, I guess, because I was
kind of interested in, I didn't want to take a
course in histology, but I was kind of interested
in the subject because I, frankly, had plans.
After I kind of got the
I had plans ultimately of going back after getting
my Ph.D. to go back to medical school. I never did do
that, but I sort of had plans to. But I was kind of
interested in histology, and that was Al Price's
field. He was another one of those stellar
individuals.
There are several people who probably weren't
nationally known or internationally known, but I
think that they're, I have had lectures. As an
undergraduate at the University of Texas, I had
taken classes with a painter whom perhaps you
know. Theophilus. Theophilus, right. He was a
stellar, he was an outstanding lecturer. And so,
my point of reference is that there were a number of
people like this that I had the good fortune to know
and participate in their classes. And while Al and
some of the others that I'm gonna mention in just a
moment didn't have the national and
international name, they were very good. very
good people too, Al Price, R.D. Turk, who was a
parasitologist. A character from the word go,
sort of like Paul Youngerman. Paul Youngerman was
a character too. Archie Flowers was a pretty good
man too. And then I'd put Mac Prescott in that same
league. Did you ever have a course with Dean Price?
No, I didn't. He let me set in on his course, and he
was very good at it. I mean, very good lecturer. So
he was teaching, still teaching course while he
was leaving? Sure. Oh, you bet. You bet. Yeah. Now,
he was nicknamed a long time before you got here as
Slick Al. That's right. And I presume that meant
that when he finished the product, It was well
polished. Well, he was kind of a politician
himself. He had a good way with words. But it was not
meant that he was going to put something off on
somebody. No, that's true. He was very...
very decisive, very forceful. You know, he
explained when he, and he was kind of strict on a
code of conduct, too. Oh, what was the code of
conduct? Well, you were to wear ties at all times.
You were to wear, not to wear boots. you were to have
a completely professional demeanor, students
and faculty. And in fact, I
believe his title was Assistant Dean McMurray.
Did you know him or know of him? He was an individual
that tried to buck, maybe I shouldn't be, don't
use, I mean, use your own discretion. McMurray was
the kind of individual that he really kind of he
kind of wanted to be Dean himself but he didn't have
the he didn't really didn't have the hoot spot to be
but he kind of bucked Al quite a bit Al was always
very neatly dressed and he spoke very well he I
doubt that I don't know where I don't imagine Al
ever said damn or anything like that he was very But
McMurray almost got fired one time because he
started wearing boots. He did the other things,
you know. He wore jackets and that sort of thing,
but he wanted to wear boots. And I think it almost
fired him over that incident. Because he was very,
Al was very. How long was it after you got here that
you decided very definitely that you would get a
PhD here whether you went to medical school or not?
How long did it take you to make that decision? I was
pretty well, financially, I was doing better than
I'd ever done in my life as a student. So, I mean, I,
you know, we, I grew up very poor, Carol and I both
were very poor. So we felt, I mean, we were very
comfortable even as students here, but Carol was
still working pretty hard too. Let's see, your
question was, how long did it take me to decide? I
decided almost right away that that's what I
wanted to do, is get a PhD. Now, my dad asked me,
son,
you're getting a PhD in what? And I said,
veterinary microbiology. I thought you was gonna
be a doctor. Well, I'm not sure. Well, we sure
thought you were gonna be a doctor, a PhD in what
again? I said, veterinary microbiology. Are you
gonna be a veterinarian? I don't think so, Dan.
Well, what the hell does a veterinary
microbiologist do if he's not a veterinarian? I
had a conversation very much like that too. What
can you do with a degree in history? What can you
make? A direct answer to your question. I knew
right away that that's what I wanted to do. I was
working on a problem that I was interested in. I was
in an environment that was, to me, very
stimulating. And how long did it take you to
identify what you were going to do as your research
topic?
After the first semester. Okay, and describe it.
Okay, yeah, well, yeah, yeah, it's, in fact, it's
something that I, the subject is equine
infectious anemia. Okay, equine infectious
anemia. I knew nothing, know nothing about
horses. Mm-hmm. Infectious anemia is a disease
that at that time was ravaging the racehorses of
the country. Well, that didn't bother me. I mean, I
wasn't high on, right? But it was a problem that
they didn't really know what the etiology was.
They weren't real sure whether it was a virus or
whether it was a PPLO-like, they called them
PPLO-like organisms at that time, or whether it
was a toxin. And so this was really a challenge to me
that I really thought, I felt like it was, and the
guy that I worked with felt like that it was a virus.
And I had happened to have had some experience in
cell culture methodology. You've gotta have
grow, in order to cultivate and study viruses,
you've gotta have cell culture systems. So I knew
right away then that that's, Did someone suggest
it to you, or did you come up with the idea? No, no one
suggested it to me, but a fellow by the name of Wayne
Moore, I don't know if you have heard of him or know
of him, knew of him or anything. Wayne was one of
these guys, real bright guys, but he was on the
faculty.
But he was pursuing a number of, disease animal
disease problems and and one of them was equine
infectious anemia and I told him that I asked you
know I got to quizzing him about that about that
situation he said you know it's a strange thing Don
said we've got this old Appaloosa's horse over
here that has never shown any signs of it But if we
take blood out of that horse and inject it into
another horse, the horse will come down with the
disease 14 days later. The unique thing about that
disease, still kind of an interesting disease,
the unique thing about that disease is that the
affected animal goes through a very structured
cyclical pattern. Each 14 days they go into fever
and then they'll clear up and be normal and then
they'll go into this. Well, so I was intrigued by
the idea of being able to. Who ended up being your
chairman? Leland. Leland Grumbles. Mm-hm.
Although Wayne directed my work. And you all had
agreed upon this as your topic within the first
year? Yeah. Mm-hm. right now meanwhile let's go to
personal life describe you and wife and Donald a
youngster describe y'all getting a place to live
oh listen yeah well I was when we how did you find a
place well again this is one this is personal I mean
this is the kind of story that may not be of any
interest to you but it's I have been lucky uh in a
number of ways throughout my life and we um You
know, after I decided to come here, after we had
decided to come here, Carol and I had decided to
come here, we didn't know for sure where we were
gonna live because married student housing was
full at that time. I had decided I was gonna come
here, but I didn't know where I was gonna live and
knew nothing about, and really, housing was kinda
scarce even at that time. And again, I happened to
be in the post office. there in the college station
where the university post office is still there.
Northgate. Northgate, right. And there's a
fellow there by the name of Sam B. Pate.
He's still around. And I was talking with Gordon, I
believe, or somebody else in the post office, and
he overheard me saying this, talking about the
plight that I was in, and And he said, young man, I
might can help you out with that situation. So we,
again, to make a long story short, we moved out
there. He had a place that was out north of Bryan on
Highway 21, sort of in the country, and just
perfect. Carol just loved that place. And so we
moved there and we stayed there for the duration of
my graduate studies. Do you remember what the rent
was?
I think it was $50 a month or something like that.
Just really, hardly anything. But the Pates were
just marvelous people. They treated us like we
were their children. And in fact,
Donald, my oldest son, was a child at that time, and
then we were expecting a second child. And the
house that we lived in, it was just a one-bedroom
house, a small place that Mr. Pate, Sam B. Pate, had
built for his son and wife to live while they were
going to school. And so it was just ideal for us. And
we told him that we was going to have to move. And he
said, look, I'll be happy to sell that house to you.
And I said, well, Mr. Pate, I just can't afford it.
He said... You won't believe how much I said, well,
really, and the real reason why we couldn't do that
was because our flat family was growing, so we
moved away. Well, the paint place, CMB Paint,
about two years after we moved off of the place.
Now, see, he was offering to sell it to us. About two
years after we moved off the place.
Right. Oil was discovered. Oil was discovered and
Mr. Pate, that property was all worth a lot of
money. So we moved over on Villa Maria and there we
had kiddos and John and then ultimately moved
here. Did you buy a house or rent? No, we bought a
house. Bought a house. Bought a house. what was it
like for the two of you and your youngster to become
part of the community? How did you all make
friends? Well, the Pates were just marvelous
people. As I say, we had been so lucky throughout
all of our, I mean, you know, we've, it's just, I
don't know, we've just been real lucky with just
about everything. into the Bryan area, for a long
time we were recognized as students. And students
were sort of, I mean, particularly the merchants.
The students,
the air base had just closed. And so there was a lot
of negative feelings about the air base personnel
and a lot of negative feelings about the
student personnel.
it it really didn't impact us all that much except
that people weren't as friendly as we thought they
should be
but if you were part of the old Bryan community I
mean there was a vast difference it's it's kind of
strange how a community seems like a community
develops a personality like a person individual
you know like an individual had a community has a
personality But once we became part of the, you
know, recognized as part of the community, this
has always been just the friendliest community.
And the same is true here in College Station. Now,
we became acquainted with y'all, of course, at
church. Now, did y'all come to the First
Presbyterian Church in Bryan soon after you
arrived? Well, not too long. No, we were here about
a year before we... We became members of the First
Presbyterian Church. We were looking around for
churches. Neither one of us had been very active in
church prior to that time. We were looking for a
church in which our kiddos could be comfortable
and grow up, Donald and John. And we felt like that
if we were going to do that, we... Well, the First
Presbyterian Church, we attended... I grew up in
the Church of Christ, I might add. And so we went to
the Church of Christ and of course that was, now
don't tell JD this because, erase this part, don't
ever show this to JD, because he is Church of
Christ. But Hellfire and Brimstone and all that
kind of stuff, no musical accompaniment, you know
the story. Anyway, we became members of the, we
explored the, First Presbyterian Church, number
one, because their music program, and number two,
because it looked like they were going to have a
pretty good youth program. Now, the minister at
the time y'all came, was it Dick Thomas? Dick
Thomas, Dick Thomas. And so we became acquainted
first with the Porterfields, Peg and Clyde
Porterfield, and then later with the Heilers. And
so the three of us, I forgot whether it's Clyde and
Peg or whether it was the Hilers invited us to
become, they asked us if we wanted to be, because we
had a pretty good background in youth care and that
sort of thing. Dick came out to see us one night, he
said, well Don and Carol, we'd love to have you as
members, we'd love to have you as youth advisors,
but if you're gonna be youth advisors, you've got
to be members of this church. And so we, and I
enjoyed the music. I was very impressed with the
music program there. So we then became members of
the church and became fairly active in the church.
Now, how long before you got into the choir was
that? Oh, almost immediately. Oh, okay. Because I
went by the choir one night. We were living not too
far from there on Villa Maria. And I went by the
choir one night and I, just just walked in you know I
didn't I hadn't said I was coming or talked to any of
them and I said I just walked in as they were
beginning to rehearse and I said to I
was wondering I've been impressed with the choir
and I was wondering if I could be a member of it and it
just chaos when I you know as I walked in and so
that's just sort of a spontaneous thing Frank
Coulter was the director. Frank Coulter was the
director and who was the organist then? the lady
whose husband was an entomologist. I can't think
either right now. But Fern Hammond. Fern Hammond,
yes. And the congregation, the worship services
were held in what is now the recreation, the
Fellowship Hall. No, it had just, I mean... Oh, it
just moved to the... It had just moved. I mean,
within... Within a month or so after we became, you
know, after we joined there. And it just moved over
there. All right. Now let's go back to you. How long
in your laboratory instructor duties were those
spring and fall, or was it 12 months of the year that
you had labs to teach? No, it was spring and fall.
And, in fact, I just did that for one year. Okay. And
then what did you do? After that I got involved in
research. You didn't have a faculty appointment
that second year? No, I didn't have a faculty
appointment until I finished. So you were then on
someone's research budget? On the research
budget, no, I was on what was referred to as a Gant.
Okay, all right. I don't know, I guess they still
use that terminology. And whose project were you
working on? Actually, Wayne Moore's.
as well as I got to do a lot of interesting you know it
was just the world was just really exciting to me I
could I became a workaholic and I guess I
maintained those those characteristics I spent a
lot of time another person I don't know if you knew
him or know of him his name was he's an electron
microscopist Hugh Grant Whitehouse
he was a strange mix.
He was apparently a very bright individual. He had
been with the Manhattan Project during the Second
World War. But he was director of the electron
microscopy center. And because I had the theory
that we were dealing, see the etiology of the
disease wasn't truly known at that time. And so I
was really anxious to try to get some specimens and
look at them under the electron microscope. So I
cultivated his, tried to cultivate his, and did
cultivate his friendship to use the electron
microscope. And so I spent between the time of, I
mean, I spent most of my, the remaining years, I
mean, I spent one year in the teaching, sort of in
the instructional mode. Well, part of my duties
too were, There was a glitch in funding for one
semester, but I mean, I never suffered from that.
But the
department had the responsibility at that time
for salmonella pallorum testing of turkeys and
chickens and that sort of thing, which meant that
they would bring in birds from various flocks and
they had to be cultured they had to be tested
serologically and then they had to be cultured for
the presence of those particular agents and so
part of my responsibility was to was to culture for
those but you know do that testing and much
of that work was done by by Gordon and myself and
Gordon had been doing that all the time and then
they got overwhelmed with it and there was a glitch
in my funding and so they just shifted me over to
that project for about, you know, for a semester or
so. Right, so after that first year when you were
teaching and had laboratory responsibilities,
then you were a full-time researcher. That's
correct. And so you're there eight to ten hours a
day. More. Okay, five days a week or six? Well,
officially five days a week, but in actuality I was
there seven days a week because I was really
interested in what I was trying to do. And what kind
of laboratory facility were you provided? Well, I
had two or three homes in which I could work. One of
them was out in what is now identified as
Veterinary Research Park. There were some old
buildings out there, and I could say, Dr. Moore, I
need a column, and I need to set this column up, and I
need this electrophoretic equipment. You ready?
Get it. And so we essentially set up a laboratory
for protean purification, cell culture, and that
sort of thing, which again was sort of, you know,
it was state of the art, but it was sort of, you know,
we sort of put it together. And so what I would be
doing would be developing cell cultures. First, I
was picking up, as horses were...